# TheoryCS

Reading: *Computable Functions* by Shen & Vereshchagin

* 5/23/25 - Computable functions, enumerable and decidable sets. Basic defintions covered.
* 5/25/25 - Universal functions and an enumerable set that is undecidable. Many of the proofs follow directly from the definitions. I'm still getting a sense of the threads that run through the concepts. I need to work through Post's construction of an enumerable undecidable set again.
* 5/29/25 - Typed the notes from chapter 3 on Godel numberings. This is a concept that I've run across before, but had little comprehension of what was happening beyond some intuitive sense. The authors work through the fact Godel universal functions exist and that it is possible to obtain a number for a composition of two functions from their numbers. I've begun Chapter 4 which delves into the properties of these Godel numberings. They set out to explain why it is that the set of numbers for the empty function is infinite and not decidable and in fact not even enumerable by Post's theorem.
* 5/30/25 - Not getting notes posted very quickly. I finished Chapter 4 up to Roger's theorem on isomorphisms of numberings. The book has been good for getting definitions and some of the basics, but having difficult getting a hold of the threads that run through the topic.
* 6/1/25 - Skipped ahead to Chapter 6 on $m$-reducibility. Frustrated with some of the vagueness in the book. The attempts at being colloquial and having flow are good, but the lack of exactness or understanding what the authors are thinking is frustrating. It's nice to encounter something familiar.
* 6/3/25 - Continued to work through facts about $m$-reducibility. The authors go into characterizing effective nonenumberability by a reduction. The proof is almost the same as that used to prove NP-Completeness. They end the section with the fact that Post introduced simple sets to find an enumberable undecidable set that is not $m$-complete.
* 6/6/25 - Worked through the chapter on oracles over the last couple of days. Basic facts are proven and a discussion of relativization. Continuing to be frustrated by the colloquial nature of the book.
* 6/8/25 - Worked through the basic definitions of $\Sigma_n$ and $\Pi_n$ of the arithmetical hierarchy.
* 6/9/25 - Worked through notes and got them typed up. Haven't proofread for errors.

I feel like I've gotten out of this book what I can. It's time to take my next steps toward understanding these ideas.

Reading: *Computability: A Mathematical Sketchboook* by Douglas S. Bridges.

* 6/11/25 - Read Chapter 1 on Turing Machines
* 6/12/25 - Worked through chapter 1 carefully. The author gives a very careful definition of a Turing Machine. It is more involved than any other definition for a Turing Machine I've seen previously. The notation is mathematical in nature and he takes care to provide rigor. Some of the notation is highly symbolic. For instance $P_3^3(\delta(q,x)) = D$ for the direction the read / write head goes in the transition. I can see where it could be a lot to interpret for a simple concept. The rigor and the care makes for a very readable setup though engagement by the reader is required.
* 6/13/25 - Read Chapter 2 on Partial Functions and did some notes. He works through what it means for a partial function to be Turing computable. It was a little hard to decipher a couple of the theorems, but the proofs made it pretty clear what he was trying to accomplish. At the end of the chapter he works through the definitions for what it means to be primitive recursive and partial recursive. There are the ususal two examples with sum and mult. I hope that I can find a source that gives some kind of intuition around why these definitions are the way they are.
* 6/15/25 - Read Chapter 3 on recursively enumerable sets and did some notes. He ends the chapter with the $s-n-m$ theorem and universal Turing machines. The construction looks very much like G\"{o}del numberings. The details around the Turing Machines in this book are a lot of bookkeeping. I'm not sure how much those details really illuminate the computational aspects of what's going on. It is if nothing else rigorous and careful argumnet. I question if I'd use this book for a course as a part of the material is developed in the exercises. While that is not all bad, it can make it harder to put all of the strands together.